# COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS OF MACHINE LEARNING ALGORITHMS FOR PREDICTING THE MORTALITY RATE OF HEPATITIS C VIRUS
## ABSTRACT
Hepatitis C is an infectious disease that affects the liver. Some of the symptoms are fatigue, vomiting, fever, loss of appetite, nausea among others and its main mode of transmission is contact with the blood of host. At the initial stage of the infection, an individual is asymptomatic. Difficulties posed by early detection at an early stage and limited clinical diagnosis has forced medical practitioners to rely on comparing the results of the blood test of patients with another who has similar symptoms, after which, treatment would be administered. Liver biopsy have been used over the years for the detection and staging of liver fibrosis. The disadvantages of this method are the results are not fully reliable due to sampling errors, it causes pain to patients and invasive. To bypass these limitations, non-invasive diagnostic biomarkers and different imaging techniques have been deployed to monitor liver conditions of patients.
The dataset used in this research, collected from the UCI Machine Learning Expository on Hepatitis C, which is made up of 615 instances will be used in the prediction of the presence of HCV or not. The dataset contained missing values and the mean imputation by chained equations (mice) was used in filling the missing values. In the selection of important features, four different methods were considered, which are: the Pearson correlation coefficient, the Recursive Feature Elimination, select best k and Mutual Information Gained. The result of feature selection showed that 6 features which played significant role in the prediction are “AST”, “BIL”, “GGT”, “CHE”, “ALB” and “ALT”. The imbalance class was handled using SMOTE and upSample, hence two scenarios were treated for each of the five machine learning algorithms namely: Logistic Regression, Naïve Bayes, K Nearest Neighbor, Random Forest and XGBoost. The tools used are R and Python, and their performances compared using accuracy, precision, and area under the curve.
For the R tool, the Random Forest (SMOTE) is a better performer with an accuracy of 97.56%, precision of 0.9907 and an area under the curve of 0.96.
Also, for Python, the Random Forest (SMOTE) had better performance with an accuracy of 96%, precision of 0.96 and an area under the curve of 0.91.
Finally, comparing the result obtained by R and Python, we note that result of RF using R had a better accuracy value of 0.9756, precision value of 0.9907. Although, both had the same auc value of 0.96.

Keywords: Recursive Feature Elimination, Mutual Information Gained, Logistic Regression, Naïve Bayes, K Nearest Neighbor, Random Forest and XGBoost.
